[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: One of the
most speculated about subjects
in modern Western history
has been whether or not
humans live more
than one lifetime.
In the East, however,
reincarnation
is an accepted
phenomenon that is
at the basis of many of the
world's oldest religions.
Since the West worships
science, it takes a scientist
to serve as a cultural
shaman in the understanding
of this esoteric subject,
and Paul Van Ward
has put his Harvard
degree to use
to provide us with a
scientific framework
for understanding reincarnation
in his book The Soul Genome.
And he joins us today.
Welcome, Paul.
I love your jacket.
I love it.
>>PAUL VON WARD: Thank you.
I'm delighted to be here.
>>REGINA: Who knows where
you were in another lifetime,
right?
>>VON WARD: That's
right, this is royalty.
>>REGINA: Flamboyant.
One of the things I really
like about your book,
you go into a lot
of the science.
So we're going to get into
some of the science of it
today because I
think it's important.
And you've spent many, many
years delving into this.
But I also would like to
spend some time getting
into the examples.
And there is this
five factor evaluation
that you take into
consideration.
We'll get to that a little
bit later in the interview
with some really
tantalizing comparison
photographs including
Marilyn Monroe.
>>VON WARD: Yes.
>>REGINA: And a
more recent version
of Marilyn Monroe, Gurdjieff
the mystic, and others.
And I just wanted
to let people know
that even though we
can't start there,
we're going to end up there.
And you've got to see these.
It's really mind blowing.
But first of all,
let's talk about you
because you didn't
come by this naturally.
>>VON WARD: Nope, I didn't.
>>REGINA: Baptist
minister, I mean, heavily
into the academic world
in your own studies.
Degree in Psychology from
Harvard, Naval officer, hello?
There's nothing in
here that speaks
to writing books
on reincarnation
so tell us your story.
>>VON WARD: Well, you know,
I was born down in Florida
on a sharecropper's farm in the
end years of the Depression.
But here we are today, 70 years
plus later, and there we are.
I started out, really, in
a traditional sort of way,
you know, responding
to the culture
that I grew up in: the Southern
Baptist fundamentalist culture,
university environment,
and following patrons.
You know, going
into the Navy, going
to the diplomatic
service, following
the paths of older people.
But I think what happened, I
was working on my first effort
at a degree in Clinical
Psychology at Florida State
University, and I
was also part time
the minister for
the local church.
And Paul Tillich came, the great
theologian of the 20th century,
and we started
talking about God.
And I was a Southern
Baptist minister,
you know, and had a very
narrow specific idea of God.
And he had talked about
some expansive idea
and I said, how can you do that?
He said, well, it's a matter
of how you define God.
Well, we had a little exchange
and it just opened my eyes up
and I started moving out
of that traditional culture
that I was in.
And also, at the same
time, in clinical classes
and psychological
developmental classes,
you know, I started
very much interested
in Carl Jung, rather
than the other folks
that I should be studying.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: And so I
realized at that time
I was really on the wrong track.
So that's when I joined
the Navy to see the world
and went to officer
candidate school
just in time for the Cuban
Missile Crisis, and Vietnam,
and so on.
But fortunately, I was picked
up as a diplomat foreign service
officer for a 15 year career.
But I got tired of
bureaucracy because I
wanted to change
things and I was always
looking at underlying questions.
And why shouldn't we do
it this way and that way.
>>REGINA: Asking
too many questions.
>>VON WARD: Asking
And, in fact, the
State Department
paid for me to go
to spend a year up
at Harvard studying these sort
of psychological questions
of organizations
and how societies
work and all of
that sort of thing.
That would be
appropriate for what
I thought my work in
the diplomatic service
might involve.
And when I made
some recommendations
to make the Department
of State run better,
Henry Kissinger and
people like that--
>>REGINA: They're always
open to suggestions, right?
>>VON WARD: I've realized after
running into that obstacle
that I didn't have a real
creative future in the State
Department, so I left and
started this track, really.
I founded and ran an
international nonprofit
for about 15 years to get the
kids through school and college
and that sort of thing.
And work on Soviet-American
citizen exchanges
and all of that.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: It was
very worthwhile work.
But all the time, I was
thinking about these paranormal
psychological consciousness
questions and issues,
and began to delve
into regressions
and learned to do that for
myself, and work with others.
And I began to just discover
a totally different world.
And met Ian Stevenson
at a conference
where we were talking
and, of course,
he was the most eminent
scientific person
to even deal with this issue.
>>REGINA: With past lives
in children in particular
>>VON WARD: Past
lives in children.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: And his
focus was on memories
that survived death and
continued to be alive,
and the children who had them.
And that was a
foundational area of work.
But my interest was in
developmental psychology.
Where do we go?
From--
>>REGINA: How do we
become what we are?
>>VON WARD: How do we become
what we are and-- so my focus
on reincarnation
research several years
later, after having talked
with him about his work
and getting more
interested in it myself,
I looked at stories
from different people.
About who seemed to have same
physical features, people
who had--
>>REGINA: Same physical
features as what?
>>VON WARD: Well, all
physical features.
But the primary areas--
>>REGINA: Well, I'm asking
in comparison to what?
They had the same
physical features--
>>VON WARD: Oh, I'm sorry.
>>REGINA: --in
comparison to what?
Just for the context.
>>VON WARD: Right.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>VON WARD: I just jumped
with that assumption.
We were talking about
comparing the features
of a person alive
today with any images
we have of the alleged
previous lifetime.
>>REGINA: And was that kind
of an original hook for you?
Was just these observations?
>>VON WARD: No.
Actually, Ian Stevenson
found in some of his cases
this sort of correspondence.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: And Walter Semkiw
who was following somewhat
in the shoes of Ian
Stevens, as well,
saw likenesses that he
would compare cases with.
So what I did to take that
sort of scientific step
to the next level was to
use biometric dimensions,
technology, we use
cameras now and--
>>REGINA: Oh yeah,
iris scans, all of it
>>VON WARD: Computers to
measure all of this stuff.
Iris scans is another
question because iris scans
seem to be a very idiosyncratic
part of our anatomy.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: But our facial
architecture, our genotypes
and so on seem to be part of
this reincarnation process.
So what I did was
to take a more,
I say this is a self-serving
way, but a more systematic,
more quantitative approach than
Ian Stevenson or Walter Semkiw,
or Adrian Finkelstein.
We'll talk about
one of his cases.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>VON WARD: Which we took
to another level with him
in my collaboration with Adrian.
>>REGINA: OK
>>VON WARD: So that was my--
and that came out of work
I did at Harvard with
David McClelland who
was a social psychologist,
but we had worked together
on his theory of how you infer
personality traits, how you
infer the underlying
personalities of people
from their written word,
from their spoken words.
So that led me to take
this developmental model
that I call the
Five Factor Model.
>>REGINA: To give
it this framework.
And one of the things you
were personally intrigued with
was the notion of prodigies.
How does someone come along that
can essentially compose music
by the age of four when
their fingers can't even
reach the keys yet and
they've had no training?
Who can speak multiple
languages and so forth.
And one example-- we'll just
give a little one right upfront
here-- was that of Paul Gauguin.
And what is believed to be his
more recent incarnation, which
is, what is
Teekamp's first name?
>>VON WARD: It's Peter Teekamp.
>>REGINA: Peter Teekamp.
And let's take a look at that.
We see the two people.
Now this was Gauguin.
>>VON WARD: Well,
this is Paul Gauguin
and his wife, Motte Gauguin.
And they were, of course,
known as a couple.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: Since
they were married.
But he, of course,
left her very early on
and went on a wanderlust
kind of sort of life.
>>REGINA: Yeah, he had a
wild kind of streak in him.
And let's look at
the next image now.
Well, here, let's
look at this one.
We don't have the one
of the two side by side,
but this one is really, to
me, one of my favorite images
you have.
>>VON WARD: Well, this is
very interesting because--
and I have to make it clear that
Peter Teekamp and his partner,
they're not married, but
Michelle Moshier actually
did this research on their own.
I didn't do it.
Stevenson or Semkiw
or no one else did.
All of us have looked
at it, obviously,
to demonstrate it as a case.
>>REGINA: And what
we're looking at here,
the research is, we're looking
at the work on the left hand
side, Gauguin, which
has age groups on it,
and then we're
looking at the work
on the right which is Teekamp.
>>VON WARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Now
Teekamp was already
recognized for his artistic
abilities by the age of five.
It took Gauguin considerably
longer to become recognized.
>>VON WARD: Oh yes.
Yeah.
Teekamp sort of made
friends in this school
because he could draw
the classmates' face.
>>REGINA: But look at
the subject matters.
Teekamp did not know
of Gauguin's work
and the correlation
between them.
>>VON WARD: No, he had no idea.
He never had even heard of him.
>>REGINA: But they're
doing the same subjects.
>>VON WARD: Had no sense of it.
Well, it's not so much
in these comparisons, not
the artistic skill itself.
It is actually--
>>REGINA: It's the subject.
>>VON WARD: --the
subject matter.
>>REGINA: It's a subject matter.
>>VON WARD: And so
here he is painting
100 years later similar
subjects at an earlier age.
And this is what we use
as an example of, sort of,
the evolutionary process.
Because it took-- Because
Gauguin, of course,
didn't start his art until
he was in his mid 20s.
And so here we have a
case where he's just
doing it automatically
from the beginning.
And we see this in
music, mathematics, art,
in Tiger Woods, and golf.
>>REGINA: Yes!
>>VON WARD: So all of
these precocities--
I like to use the word precocity
because all people have
precocity in one
area or the other.
And there's no
explanation for it.
Noam Chomsky talked
about language
even that we come already with
the structures of our language
in--
>>VON WARD: Yes.
>>VON WARD: --our inheritance.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes.
>>VON WARD: So this inheritance.
Where does it come from?
It's not something that's
developed in accord
with a model that
psychologists use today.
You learn it from
the environment,
you get reinforcement,
all of that.
>>REGINA: No because
in that case,
you would see within families
very similar personality
traits, behaviors,
propensities, and precocities.
>>VON WARD: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: But you
don't see that.
We're each very
individual regardless--
>>VON WARD: Regardless
of the family.
>>REGINA: --of that
nature nurture part.
>>VON WARD: Some of them
are in the same family.
I mean musicians in the
same family and so on.
But those are just
exceptions, you know?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: Because
most people are
different from their family in
terms of the area of precocity.
>>REGINA: Very much so.
Very unique.
And one of the-- Carol
Bowman, continued on.
She did similar work
to Stevenson's, but she
was working with the
children directly
and I love some of the examples.
You bring up her
work in your book,
but you have others as well.
But let's, again, by
example because I learn well
by example.
So I like examples.
But let's talk about the Indian
man with the shortened fingers.
>>VON WARD: Sure.
>>REGINA: Can you
give an example
of how something carries
forward as a trauma
even from another lifetime?
>>VON WARD: Well, this is one of
Ian Stevenson's most well-known
cases because he had observed
that certain features could
carry forth from one
lifetime to another
or appear to carry forward.
But this is a case where
you had an accident
at the end of a lifetime.
Where a person's fingers
were mangled and cut off.
And yet, you still
had some carry forward
in the genes that left you
with a disfigured, deformed
same area of the body.
I had a case in this with
Claus von Stauffenberg case
and the person who
may be likely to be
the reincarnation of Claus von
Stauffenberg who had problems
on his fingers, in his eye, on
his back that are coincident
with the injuries of
Claus von Stauffenberg.
>>REGINA: Which is really,
I mean this brings up,
this begs a lot of questions.
And this is right down to
birthmarks on the body.
Simple things that
all of us carry.
A marking here or maybe a
propensity or weakness there.
That may be an imprint
that's carried forward
through the soul portion
of our being and imprints
on the DNA of our bodies.
So it's not just
extraordinary things.
You can probably find
something on your own body--
>>VON WARD: Sure.
>>REGINA: --that may have
been a remnant or an artifact
of something that had
happened from another time.
>>VON WARD: And different
figures, figurations
in your face and so
on may carry forward.
But there's the
underlying bone structure
which seems to be
carried forward.
And we use the
biometric dimensions
to measure our architecture
of our bone structure.
And that seems to carry forward.
But then what is
interesting about the fact
that it's a wound in
the past life that gets
carried forward in
some other form,
but in the same
part of the body.
Now this suggests something
about the psychoplasm
or the soul genome
carrying information--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: --that there
is some deformation that
occurred at the end of life
or near the end of life which
somehow goes as part
of the epigenome that
is the information around
the specific physical genes
that somehow affect
this new body.
>>REGINA: That inform the DNA.
>>VON WARD: That informs--
>>REGINA: And I mean,
then we're talking--
I wasn't going to get
into it at this point,
but you're talking
about this 95% junk DNA.
>>VON WARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That the human
being supposedly drags around
with us.
>>VON WARD: Right.
>>REGINA: And this puts
a little different spin
on what may be actually
going on there.
>>VON WARD: No, absolutely.
And we don't even
know whether it
is the junk DNA
or the information
field which encompasses--
>>REGINA: Permeates or yeah.
>>VON WARD: Permeates.
Because when you have a physical
feature of any kind that
has been expressed
by DNA, the genes
that are appropriate for that
part of your body, what happens
is regardless of the
gene itself that you
might bring from your
parent, it is a question
of what actually makes it
express one way or the other.
And that's where I think we're
talking about consciousness
as part of the soul
genome that activates
the expression of the genes.
>>REGINA: And you're getting
into Bruce Lipton's work
in epigenetics
quite a bit there.
>>VON WARD: Yeah, I mean,
what we're learning--
>>REGINA: Not his
work, but I mean
his work expresses part
of what you're saying.
>>VON WARD: It's the
same area of science
that is fascinating now because
we know that information that
is consciousness or intention
or some sort of energetic field
that's not quite in our
three dimensional field.
That's why I call it
the four dimensional.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: You know,
because it's something
that the Russians
have been dealing
with for some time
trying to figure out
this energetic field
that encompasses
our physical biofield.
So we've got now this new area
in science which, in my view,
underpins our
reincarnation theories.
>>REGINA: Yes, it
makes perfect sense.
You're talking about fields--
>>VON WARD: There's a mechanism.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And one of the examples I
remember in Bruce's work
was that he was talking
about an environment in utero
where a child was going to
be born into a family that
had a fair amount of
domestic violence.
And in response
to this, the child
came out with a thicker
skull than was possessed
by the other members
of the family
by the previous generation
in the attempt to,
he was extrapolating,
but this was
to be able to protect itself
against the future violence
that was going to come.
Now you have a lot of questions
that are embedded in that.
Why would a soul choose
such a situation?
Then to be able to
also-- which has
very good reasons we
would choose that.
That might be our
group that we've
been working things
out with, right?
We'll get into that.
>>VON WARD: That's
another question.
>>REGINA: But then just to
affect the DNA to the extent
that you can thicken the skull
while in utero, in development.
>>VON WARD: Yeah.
Well, this brings to
the point-- I'll just
make a short point here.
Because we have a
theoretical question
of when does the soul
genome or psychoplasm
engage in the zygote
process of development?
And it seems to me
that if we're talking
about these energetic fields
and information fields
that it is likely to happen
when you have the fertilized
egg seeking to implant
itself in the uterine wall,
because there is a
chemical electrical set
of communications that
determine whether or not
the uterine wall
will actually accept
that particular fertilized egg.
And so it seems that this
sort of field of information--
>>REGINA: So you
feel that you think
that it happens at that
moment before it even
attaches to the wall?
>>VON WARD: I
think it is before.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>VON WARD: Because I
think it is information.
It's like the
synapses in our brain.
You know, we don't have a
connection between a dentrite
and another synapse over here.
We have a space and that space
is a chemical electrical area
of communication.
So for me, the soul genome,
or psychoplasm as I call it,
is that kind of phenomenon.
>>REGINA: So the soul would
start expressing its connection
with the egg before it even
attaches you're saying?
>>VON WARD: No, in the process.
>>REGINA: In the process.
OK.
>>VON WARD: That is, if you
look at the Buddhist tradition,
you know, one of the things
they say as they're chanting
for the soul to make sure it
gets in the right copulating
couple and make sure they're
getting in the right connection
that they want to have
for the next lifetime--
that ancient view from
Buddhism seems to me to be
compatible with this modern
scientific perspective
of some connection point in
the process of the physical
and the non-physical coming
together to make it function.
And I'm speculating
at this point,
but it makes logical sense that
something like that happens.
>>REGINA: OK, that
does make sense.
I want to share something with
you that was an esoteric thing
and I'll go out on a
limb a little bit here.
But I was having dinner
with a prominent physicist,
this was a number of years ago.
And he was writing a book.
I won't say the name and
I won't say the book.
And he had gained some
reputation in this field,
but now he was
working on a new book.
And in this book,
they were trying
to find what was the
differentiating factor
between the way one brain
and one consciousness
develops versus another.
And I asked him, I said,
well, what was the organizing
principle, was the word he used.
And so I said, "Do
you know the answer?"
And he said, "No, but
I'll figure it out
by the time I'm
finished with the book."
And I had a little chuckle
with him over that.
And it was just a
casual conversation.
So I believe it was
the next morning
or maybe two mornings later
as I was in that crossover
state between dream
time and wakefulness,
a voice said to me, and
I wrote it down here,
but the organizing principle
behind quantum coherence
and the human mind is the
intention of the soul.
>>VON WARD: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: That makes sense.
>>VON WARD: I think
this make sense.
When I speak to my
neuroscience colleagues
about how this consciousness,
mind, brain interaction
functions and they have
a dilemma because what
we can study now with the
technologies that we have
is a bottom up principle.
And so we see mind being
formed, and memories,
and learning from the bottom up.
But we have no sense of
the top down function which
brings the integration
and takes all
of these multitudes
of signals coming in
through our sensory
systems and then
make out of it the images,
those concepts, and all
of those things that
we have created.
Anyhow, that's part of the
process of reincarnation
because that pre-exists
this lifetime.
That's what carries forward
from one life to the other,
in my view.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
it makes perfect sense.
And then also, in your
book you speak quite a bit
about nonlocal consciousness.
Which is really, I
mean, that's what
the soul would be considered.
In a physical sense, a
nonlocal consciousness.
And so if we're looking
at nonlocal consciousness,
we're looking at memory that
extends beyond the brain.
And you gave a couple of
examples in the book and one
was about, as I recall, it
was a college student who
had around 126 IQ,
something like that.
>>VON WARD: Oh yes, yes.
>>REGINA: Who had
some issue where
they had to go in
and do an operation,
perform an operational
procedure on the brain
only to find there
was nothing there.
>>VON WARD: No brain.
It was a brain stem.
>>REGINA: But to find only
there was just a fluid sac.
>>VON WARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: The grey
matter wasn't there.
>>VON WARD: Yet the IQ--
>>REGINA: Was 126.
>>VON WARD: 126 with that.
This is the conundrum that
neuroscience has today.
I mean it's really
limited by its technology.
And so what we're
developing here
in this concept of a
psychoplasm or soul genome,
we're talking
about consciousness
as a transcendent aspect
of the universe which
can express itself in a
body like the info field
expresses itself through a gene.
You see?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: As above, so below.
>>REGINA: So below, right.
>>VON WARD: So you're looking
at it just at a different level.
And I think that's
the model that we
need to work with in
thinking about reincarnation.
And it's not just
as a lot of people
think and sort of wishful
thinking, I think,
to say, oh, the soul, spirit
just comes into a body
and has a physical experience.
That doesn't make sense either.
>>REGINA: No, it doesn't.
>>VON WARD: Because the body
and all of our functions
are integrated with our
brain system and so on.
So we really have
the physical body
as an expression of a
total kind of entity
that shapes the physical
side, the physical
has its influence on
the consciousness side.
It's an interactive process.
And that's certainly
clear when we
look at personalities and
behaviors that we talk about.
>>REGINA: Yes and
when you take the soul
factor into consideration
rather than just being
some kind of random
self-organizing thing,
this is where you get the notion
of individuated consciousness.
>>VON WARD: Yeah, but I
use the term individuated
consciousness, but I need to
qualify that with the notion
that all of us are
connected, entangled,
as we say in quantum mechanics.
>>REGINA: We are entangled, yes.
>>VON WARD: So we're not
totally separate from but it's
like a laser.
A laser is light waves
concentrated in one area.
So I look at the soul
genome as consciousness
concentrated in a
particular area.
So that's what we mean by
individuated consciousness.
>>REGINA: Right.
That can carry forward
with its unique expression,
unique memories, et cetera
while still being entangled
with the rest of the whole.
And, of course,
we have religions
that try to unravel this one.
>>VON WARD: Yes.
>>REGINA: And
fortunately, we have
people like Dean
Radin who are also
trying to unravel it
along with others.
>>VON WARD: And he's
doing a good job
looking at that issue, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, he is
doing a good job on it.
And we are going to-- we
have in the rest of this
we have a lot of
images coming up.
>>VON WARD: Oh, yeah.
OK.
>>REGINA: We're going to take a
little break in a minute here.
But we have images coming up
of James Madison and a more
recent James Two.
>>VON WARD: Revolutionaries.
>>REGINA: Revolutionaries.
And we're going to
talk about that.
Where are they now
when we need them?
And we're going to talk
about Marilyn Monroe.
Elizabeth Browning, the poet.
And then her newer self.
And Gurdjieff.
And so we have some
images for all those.
So don't go away.
We're going to take a short
break and when we come back,
we'll show you all
of these comparisons.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And we're back.
And we've already
teased you enough.
We're going to start
going into this.
I need you to explain
one thing for us.
There are five
different factors.
You touched a little
bit on a couple of them
earlier, but just tell
us one, two, three, four,
five; the five
different factors you're
looking for in this
evaluation process.
>>VON WARD: Right, we think
the model of the soul genome
can be divided into five.
One is the physical, of course,
the genome, the biometrics
and that sort of thing.
The other is the cerebrotype,
which is the mind.
The way we use our intellect.
What the intellect is and
how it functions for us.
We look at the performotype
which is how we do our things.
Whether it's art, or
math, or whatever.
We have a pattern that we can
see from lifetime to lifetime.
We have the ego
type which is really
our emotional type of behavior.
Whether we are passive
or aggressive and so on.
And the other one is which--
>>REGINA: Let's see,
we have phenotype,
genotypes,
cerebrotypes, egotypes,
and you just said performotypes.
Did we get them all?
>>VON WARD: I think
we've got them.
>>REGINA: OK, so we're going
to start out with the example.
We want to go to the
example of James Madison.
Now we're going to use this
as a really strong example
of a cerebrotype.
But a large argument can
be made also for the geno,
phenotype as well when
we look at these images.
Tell us what we're seeing
here left to right.
>>VON WARD: Well, left to
right, the one on the left
is a painting of James
Madison at age 31.
The one in the middle
is a charcoal portrait
of James Two-- we don't tell the
identity of this person-- that
was also painted about the same
time in his lifetime about age
32 or so.
And the one on the
right is a transposition
of these two figures,
sort of a composite
to see how closely they match.
And I think it's pretty obvious.
>>REGINA: That's pretty obvious.
I mean even with the beard which
would not show his jaw line.
But you can get an idea
of what's under there.
>>VON WARD: And what's
even more interesting,
in this particular case,
James Madison had just--
>>REGINA: Shaved his beard?
>>VON WARD: No, no.
He gave this to a woman
that he was engaged to
and hoped to marry.
And the other guy
is on his honeymoon,
just having been married.
>>REGINA: Oh interesting.
>>VON WARD: And the eyes.
You might not be able
to see it at this scale,
but they're looking at
exactly in the same direction.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: Painted
by two artists.
Two parts of the world.
Two hundred years apart.
>>REGINA: A couple
hundred years apart.
>>VON WARD: And
we have many cases
that are like this, where the
variance in the biometrics
is 1% or less.
>>REGINA: And now in this one,
was that variance 1% or less?
>>VON WARD: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: OK and the
facial biometrics.
>>VON WARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now that speaks well
to the genotype.
>>VON WARD: It does.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about the cerebrotype.
Let's give a little
example of what
was going on in
each of their lives
that would indicate
this same soul
was carrying these same
patterns, same kinds
of thoughts, activities,
and talents forward.
>>VON WARD: Well, James
Madison, for example,
was going to what
is now Princeton.
He was very
interested in theology
at the beginning of that
particular lifetime.
He got involved in sort of
philosophical, political issues
because the revolution
was beginning
to fester against
England at that time.
His father appointed him
to be an officer when
he got back home to play a
little role in the local army.
But he was thinking
about maybe he
would study law and
become a lawyer.
And then, of course,
things evolved
that he was elected as a
delegate, got into politics,
and then started working
on the Constitution and all
of those things.
James Two had a very similar
way of thinking and going
about issues and
looking at them.
And he followed-- it's uncanny.
>>REGINA: Almost the
exact same track.
>>VON WARD: Almost
exactly the same thing.
>>REGINA: I mean even
geographically they
were in a very--
basically the same area.
>>VON WARD: There are some
other differences that
indicate that there were
some issues of karma
of the second person having
to pay some of the karmic debt
that James had
developed in his life
in terms of being
a slave holder,
and the way he handled
his family and finances,
and that sort of thing.
>>REGINA: So James number two
had to do a little debt paying?
>>VON WARD: He had to do a
little bit of debt paying.
And I think, if I
remember correctly,
he's still paying
some at this stage.
And he's also involved in other
revolutionaries, some of which
are reincarnated in
this period of time.
>>REGINA: We're going to
get to that in a little bit
because I do want
to talk about that.
Like I said, where are they now?
It's very interesting
when you start looking.
As you say, James Madison
had-- that was his expression
in that lifetime
as this statesman.
It doesn't mean
because we have what
is perceived to be an elevated
status in one lifetime
that we're going
to keep carrying
that same tradition
forward at all.
>>VON WARD: In fact, the
history of many cases where
we have several different
past lifetimes that we think
are well documented you see
this up and down differing
experiences but dealing with
some of the same issues.
>>REGINA: And also
expanding one's
experience and understanding.
Maybe, like you say,
adjusting for a little karma
and so forth.
OK, so that was--
that's very interesting.
And now I want to take
a look at Sherrie Laird.
>>VON WARD: Oh yes.
>>REGINA: Marilyn Monroe.
And this is the one, see
here where we're doing this--
this progression--
>>VON WARD: Progression, yeah.
>>REGINA: --of these two.
>>VON WARD: This
is a case developed
by a friend and colleague,
Adrian Finkelstein.
He had worked with Sherrie
for quite some time developing
the history of her case as
being the incarnation of Marilyn
Monroe.
And we met at a
conference some years back
and I-- at that time, I had just
developed the biometrics model
and the technology
for doing that.
>>REGINA: This is the case you
were talking about earlier.
>>VON WARD: Yeah, so
Adrian said to me, Paul,
I've worked on this case.
Let's see how your model
will work with this set of--
>>REGINA: Biometrics, yeah.
>>VON WARD: --two photographs.
So he gave them to
me, and I went back
and did my little
diametric measurements.
And we do ratios of
differences to determine
how much variance there is.
And I called him
back and I said,
Adrian, that's less than 1%.
If these two photographs
were passed to the CIA,
they would---
>>REGINA: They'd mistake
one for the other.
>>VON WARD: --say, this
is the same person.
Exactly.
And so he was very
excited about that
because it confirmed
at the physical level
what he'd been dealing with
at the psychological level.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about that part.
Because Sherrie Laird had
had some rather dramatic kind
of remembrances that
were unpleasant.
>>VON WARD: Yes.
>>REGINA: Can you talk
about that a little bit?
What kind of started
tipping this off?
>>VON WARD: Well,
let me just say
that one of the things that
Adrian did working with Sherrie
over the years was
helping her with some
of her psychological issues.
And what we
discovered, Adrian did,
and as we looked at this from
a developmental perspective
that Marilyn had a very
dependent personality, got
caught up in relationships with
men that weren't good for her,
and we all know that story.
Well, same sort of issues
were happening with Sherrie.
And so--
>>REGINA: But that
would cover most women.
A lot of women.
>>VON WARD: I don't
want to go there.
I don't want to go there.
>>REGINA: I'm joking.
I didn't mean it.
>>VON WARD: But what--
Marilyn, you know,
would then act out those issues.
Sherrie was doing
the same thing.
Adrian was working
with her on that.
The tendency towards
suicidal activities,
that was another
issue like that.
>>REGINA: She was displaying
a lot of Marilyn's tendencies.
But then she had a recall.
>>VON WARD: Yeah, well she had
recalls that reminded her--
and this is a little bit of a--
>>REGINA: Is it a stretch or?
>>VON WARD: Question.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>VON WARD: I mean,
in other words,
you have the problem of did
Sherrie have information--
>>REGINA: Right, or
was it genuine recall?
>>VON WARD: --from
other sources.
But I think that what happened
in the length of that case
when Adrian worked on
it over many years,
I think he had enough
of those examples
to say that there was
probably some recall in that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, the one I was
referring to was the one around
Marilyn's death--
>>VON WARD: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --that Sherrie
was supposedly recalling.
>>VON WARD: Yeah, but see, I
don't know how to deal with
that because we have a lot of--
>>REGINA: That could happen.
Famous people, we
can read about them.
>>VON WARD: We can
read about them.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>VON WARD: And
it could be, see,
that gets into the
what I would call
the telepathic
kind of connection.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: But the package,
I think, holds together.
>>REGINA: It holds together.
And the strongest parts are the
genotype, the phenotype, the--
>>VON WARD: Yeah, yeah.
Also in the talent areas.
Both were interested
in acting and music
and they had flip-flopped,
but Marilyn in the beginning
had wanted to be
a musician, too,
and then became an
actor and vice versa.
>>REGINA: Now we're going to
take a look at an egotype.
We're going to be seeing
Elizabeth Browning.
>>VON WARD: Yep.
>>REGINA: OK.
And Paula.
>>VON WARD: Yes, Paula.
>>REGINA: And let's
take a look at this.
Now-- wow.
Well, just energetically.
>>VON WARD: Oh,
I have any number
of paired images of these two.
Now Paula is in her
50s at this point,
but we have good photographs
of Elizabeth Barrett-Browning
and Paula to compare.
And this is one of
these cases that
is, once again, right
in the 1% category.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: But
what is interesting
here is the egotype in
terms of the dependency that
both developed on drug usage
very, very, very early.
But what's interesting about
that, I mean, a lot of people
could be paired--
>>REGINA: Sure, they look
alike and they have drug issues
>>VON WARD: --but in
spite of those problems,
you had the poetry, of course.
And you have the poetry
that is a world-renowned.
>>REGINA: That's supposed to
say Paula, not Paul, by the way.
>>VON WARD: Oh that was
supposed to be Paula.
>>REGINA: That's an old one.
Paula.
Just to correct that.
>>VON WARD: The typo.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's a typo.
>>VON WARD: The
typo there is Paula.
Yeah, I won't use her last name,
but she's a psychologist now
working for the US government
helping military personnel
and so on.
>>REGINA: But you could almost
see the same feelings, life
experience, and expressions
certainly coming out
of both of their
eyes in this one.
>>VON WARD: That's
why I mentioned
that about the James
and James Two case.
Often we see images mirroring
not only the biometrics,
but something of the
emotion involved.
And so they were
both women who also
depended on sort of
cult connections.
Having somebody tell them
about the paranormal and the--
>>REGINA: Same interest.
>>VON WARD: So you
have both the physical,
the artistic in terms
of poetry, and these--
>>REGINA: The cerebrotype
aspects as well.
>>VON WARD: --egotypes,
all of them.
They really match there.
All of these cases are strong
in all five of the categories.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: So we're just
looking at them as examples.
>>REGINA: Right, which is
why we're looking at these,
but you have a couple
hundred other cases, too.
OK, the next one we're
going to go to is Gurdjieff.
He's a rascal.
>>VON WARD: This is an
interesting one because--
>>REGINA: OK, look at that.
Look at those two guys.
>>VON WARD: Yeah, this is--
the guy below is Drago Plecko.
He's a good friend and
colleague over in Croatia.
And I didn't invent this.
People started telling
him some years ago,
you know, you look
like Gurdjieff.
And so he made a
picture of himself
and I took a picture of him.
And we compared the
biometrics and so on.
That was very strong.
And then we started
looking back and I
had to go back into Gurdjieff's
early life, you know,
before he became this
famous mystic who
set up schools and
wrote books that
so affected many
people in the West.
They were aggressive
with people,
they were somewhat
circus barker types,
you know, selling their
ideas and then promoting
some scheme or the other.
Terrible drivers, both of them.
In fact, Drago, his family
won't let him drive anymore
because he's--
>>REGINA: Such a
horrible driver.
>>VON WARD: Such a bad driver.
So we matched up all of these
different factors in our model,
and it's just a
very interesting,
interesting combination.
Now, of course, Gurdjieff
was looking for great men
around the Middle
East and so on.
Well, Drago has done
documentaries of the Dalai Lama
and all kind of mystical
people around the planet,
and he's been following a
healer in the Adriatic Sea area
and has gotten a lot
of attention for that.
Just a fascinating guy.
And so all of these
features are there,
but it just shows you that
the mystical, spiritual person
at another level was a
rough kind of personality.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: And had
behavior traits that
were, on the surface,
inconsistent with the way
we think of them today.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: But this is what
makes this fun because you
see the things that are
not the most publicly
publicized reputation of people.
This is a good way
of expressing that.
>>REGINA: And as you say
in your book, as well,
there are only so many
factors we can go on
in determining this within any
scientific framework at all.
Because if we're
looking at a soul which
lives in dimensions beyond
this density of this field
we're in right
now, we don't have
the capability scientifically
to measure them
when they're in maybe a
sixth, seventh, eighth
dimensional aspect.
It's not possible.
So we can only go one what's
evidenced in this dimension.
>>VON WARD: Let me say
something about that.
In other words, the
reason I use this model
and with different factors
is because, you know,
we've all heard about
the twin studies that
were started decades ago.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: When twins were
separated shortly after birth
and they were discovered
by psychologists
and found not only did they
have their physical features,
like we have in these cases,
but they also had other factors.
The personality, their habits,
the wife of both of them
happened to be the same names.
>>REGINA: Same names, even, yes.
>>VON WARD: You know, all these
sort of little picayune things
that you would think, why
would they all be the same?
Well, there is no
psychologist today
who will claim that they
have discovered the DNA
to account for those kind
of behavioral similarities.
And say-- they say,
oh well, there's
just something about the twin
that makes this kind of detail
fall out over decades
of living elsewhere.
Well, if you think about
this in terms of two
lifetimes and you
still have that level
of coincidence of
taste, names, locations,
particular habits, and so on.
That is a very
powerful coincidence
to claim that it just
happened by accident.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: We've done
statistical analyses
of these kinds of
similarities as psychologists
have done with twins.
And you cannot say that these
two lifetimes with all these
similarities that we describe
in the book cannot be
statistically, scientifically
relegated to coincidence
or randomness.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: So there
has to be a mechanism.
There has to be some connection.
And we call that psychoplasm
or the soul genome.
>>REGINA: Right.
And you had-- you were--
last time I saw you--
I interviewed you
a few years ago--
you were encouraging
people if they
had some curiosity
about themselves
or some kind of
inkling of someone
they may have been to join
you in your reincarnation
experiments.
Now since I talked to you,
how has that all played out?
Do most people-- like, all
these that we just looked at, do
they easily buy into the notion
that that was them once they're
presented with the evidence
or is there resistance?
>>VON WARD: No, no, no.
A lot of people want to be
told by a psychic or someone
from the Pleiadian
group who they
were in a particular lifetime.
And people who
stop at that level
don't get much out of
it except an ego boost.
>>REGINA: Or not.
>>VON WARD: Or not, if it
doesn't work out that way.
But I would say less than
50% of the people who've
come to us saying, "I'd like
to work with you on my case,"
have taken the time to go
into the detail of comparisons
that we've been talking about.
And I think a lot of
people when they discover
that it's hard work, they
don't want to stay with it.
But let me tell you, those
who have stayed with it
have an understanding
of themselves
in a way that no
amount of counseling,
psychological workups would
give that level of insight
into who they are.
Because once you start
seeing a trajectory of traits
in a historical context with
your present life and say,
oh, I see how that works.
>>REGINA: See where
it's coming from.
>>VON WARD: I see
where it comes from.
It's an explanation.
I now understand why
I have this problem
with my wife, or my
kids, or my boss,
or my lack of interest
in this job that I have.
Well, no wonder I don't like
this job because that's not
what I am at this level.
As I was using my own
example earlier, you know,
the reason I left a lot of what
people would consider to be
very desirable professional
situations-- well,
that wasn't my inner--
>>REGINA: It wasn't your path.
And now, Teekamp went
through this, too.
When he was made aware about
the Gauguin connection,
he started realizing that some
of these behaviors, once we
realize they were carried
forward, some of these
were not really
desirable characteristics
to continue with.
>>VON WARD: No, no.
One of them, of course,
was suicide attempt.
The way he treated
his wife and children.
Those kinds of activities.
Recognition that, hey,
I'm carrying something
from the past.
So I didn't understand
it at the time.
I have an explanation
for it now.
And he then makes a conscious
choice: I'm going to change.
And that's the
value of these kinds
of assessments of
past life legacies.
If you don't use them to
give you insight into changes
that you could make, then
it's not worth very much.
>>REGINA: It really
isn't worth very much.
Like you say, either
it's an ego boost
or it's a deflation when
you find out that maybe you
were a chambermaid or
cleaning the toilets
in some incarnation.
But now let's look at
some people who were-- we
talked about this earlier, we
mentioned it, touched on it,
Madison is part of it-- there
are these individuals who
you believe at this time
through the experiments
and the science
have reincarnated
at this time that were part
of the founding fathers.
Some of the primary founding
fathers of this country.
Everybody keeps saying where
are they when we need them now?
A When things have
gone a bit astray
from the original
intention it sounds like.
>>VON WARD: Well, I
don't think that-- see,
I think people expect you
to replay the same role,
and that's not the way
reincarnation happens.
You come with the same
potential, the same legacy,
the same capacities
and problems.
But it doesn't mean
that you're going
to be a president or a leader
or whatever in this lifetime.
You're doing something else.
Or you may or may not.
And it wouldn't work
the way you suggest it.
>>REGINA: I'm sure it wouldn't.
>>VON WARD: If these same
people were in those positions
today, let me tell you, they
would not be able to cooperate.
>>REGINA: With each other.
>>VON WARD: With each other.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about, if
you don't mind talking about,
I'm a big fan of
Thomas Jefferson.
I was obsessed when
I was in my 20s
with reading biographies
of Thomas Jefferson.
I couldn't get enough of this.
It's like I loved
this individual.
And so one of the beings
that you're talking about
is incarnated at this
time, whose name is Thomas,
it appears to be Thomas
Jefferson in the day.
And so how, and when you're
looking at the cerebrotype
or performotype, how does
that display in his life?
>>VON WARD: Well, in
all of these cases--
>>REGINA: Does he have a
similar facial appearance?
>>VON WARD: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Sure.
But there are several
people like that.
If you ask Jim Tucker at
the University of Virginia,
"Jim, how many Thomas
Jefferson cases do you have?"
And he says, "Five."
And Jim asks me, he said,
"How many do you have?"
I said, "I've got four."
>>REGINA: And then of course
you have about 1,000 Cleopatras,
OK?
>>VON WARD: Yes.
So there are a lot of
those things, but so--
>>REGINA: But is there
any clear indication
that this one person may
actually carry these traits?
>>VON WARD: Well,
according to my model,
the factors all are
quite good matches.
But like most of
the cases, I hardly
ever use anyone's
name because I think
people who are serious
about this don't really
want to be claiming it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>VON WARD: You know, some
people are for ego reasons
and so on.
And some people are willing--
I have a few people who
have given me written permission
to use their names if I want
to because they feel
that it might help learn.
>>REGINA: Right it'll help
others become confident
and come forward.
>>VON WARD: --that have
that sort of thing.
But in this case, I have
followed a group of individuals
that I think are, and I
think other people would
agree with me, that
this is probably
the likely case
of individuals who
were active in the Revolution.
And they still have the same
antipathies that they had,
they have the same
sort of habits,
the lack of communication
that they had.
I mean, we produced
a country out
of that revolutionary
period, but it
was based on a lot of fighting
and scrabbling around.
>>REGINA: Politics
was as dirty then--
>>VON WARD: --as it was now.
As it is now.
And so we wouldn't
want those people
to be in the same
positions again today.
But the people who are
in those positions today
also have their past
life connections
and so we don't really know what
all their past lives are and so
on.
But I'm sure some of
those same factors
are carried over into this
political campaign in 2012.
>>REGINA: As what was
happening back then.
And when we were
speaking off camera,
you were telling me that
probably the most disappointing
aspect of doing this work
to you, it's very exciting,
you're certainly
laying a framework
to start working from in this.
But that once people,
even when people do
understand what or who they were
in a given time, that things it
don't really change much.
>>VON WARD: They don't.
And my whole theory, of course,
as I mentioned to you before
is that reincarnation is
the function through which
the universe realizes
its conscious evolution.
We are part of the
Creator's flow of evolution,
but it's a slow process.
And I think that what
we are facing today
is that technology is
going very rapidly,
change is happening
very rapidly,
but at the level
of consciousness,
we're not going at that pace.
And what I'm hoping
is if we could
have more discussions
like this one
about how reincarnation
seems to work,
and if people then
said, "Oh, I see.
This is why I have these
problems, these issues
with this person, that person,
with myself, et cetera,"
then with that
conscious awareness,
we can speed up the process
of conscious evolution.
>>REGINA: But doesn't
it create, isn't
it driven by a person asking
the question of themselves
why do I feel this way?
I mean let's talk about common--
>>VON WARD: You mean to
discover something of the past.
>>REGINA: And also
to utilize that.
If we do reincarnate and we go
on this wheel of incarnation,
this wheel of life
as Amika Swami
calls it, again and
again, doesn't it
seem that the opportunity
is simply to grow,
learn, and refine
oneself each time?
I mean, it's almost
a depressing thought
to think we get stuck
in old behaviors
and never move beyond them.
So, say, I'm sure
anyone watching this
would not want to
be in that mode.
>>VON WARD: Right, right.
>>REGINA: So how does
one begin engaging
with one's own past and
that process of discovery?
>>VON WARD: You have to
have a particular world
view of reality.
You have to have the
assumption, first of all,
that we have some conscious
control over ourselves.
Our own use of our options.
And this is something
that doesn't come out
of neuroscience.
This is something that has to
come down from the top down
into our thinking about
ourselves and the beliefs
that we have.
And I think that we need to
talk about reincarnation not
only at the scientific, sort of,
substantive level of evidence
and so on; we really
need to talk about it
in terms of a cosmology
of a self-learning,
self-experimenting,
self-actualizing, if we want
to use that term which
came from Abraham Maslow,
and I think that's what we are.
We should be self-actualizing.
>>REGINA: So we can't
just separate ourselves
out from what's happening
on a cosmic level,
but in sheerly
practical terms, how
about certain tools such
as hypnosis, past life
regression, and the like?
Are these things that are--?
>>VON WARD: These
are useful ways
to discover more information
about who you are.
>>REGINA: Right
>>VON WARD: But then you have
to take the responsibility
of deciding what you're
going to do with it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>VON WARD: And that's
the point I'm making.
I think a lot of people are--
>>REGINA: You can't use it as
an excuse to continue behavior.
>>VON WARD: You can't
use it as an excuse,
and I don't want to offend some
of my regression colleagues
and friends, but sometimes the
person coming to a regression
therapist thinks that that's
going to be the answer.
You know, I'm going to
have the regression session
and it'll all be better.
And it does help, as we know
in psychological counseling,
just talking through is helpful.
But at this level
of soul factors,
you've got to work
on it yourself.
>>REGINA: We've got
to do it ourselves.
We have to actually engage with
it and also remove the ego.
Because the reality is if
we've been around that wheel
a few times, we've
done some good things,
we've done some things
we're not very proud of.
And we have to just look at it
as a continuum of refinement.
And I like the word
refinement because, really,
when it comes down to that,
it's stripping away the blame.
And I thank you so much
for taking the time
to come and be with us.
>>VON WARD: It was a pleasure.
>>REGINA: And taking the
time to do all this work.
I mean The Soul Genome is
a really beautiful book.
And there are a lot
more examples in here
than what we were
able to get to today.
>>VON WARD: Thank you
>>REGINA: Thank you, Paul.
Well now, if you would like
to continue your own research
into this subject,
I highly recommend
that you read The Soul Genome.
Meanwhile supporting material
is available in my interviews
with Rupert Sheldrake, Bruce
Lipton, and Gary Schwartz,
all of which you'll find in
the Gaiam TV Conscious Media
archives.
Until next time, thanks for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]